Title:Text:Date
History_Of_Student_Loan_Debt:The U.S. Supreme Court has decided to hear two legal challenges brought by six Republican-led states and two student loan debtors to President Biden’s $400 billion debt-relief plan, which promises to provide as much as $20,000 in forgiveness to more than 40 million Americans with federal college loans. The program has been placed on hold in light of these cases, causing Biden to extend the pandemic-era pause on federal student loan repayments through June 2023. The United States is an outlier in terms of its prohibitively large student debt, which stands at $1.75 trillion and amounts to roughly 7.5 percent of the country’s gross domestic product, and exorbitant college costs. Indeed, other countries such as France and Germany offer low-cost tuition, and in countries including Finland, Brazil, Norway and Panama, there is no tuition at all. But education did not always come at such a high cost in America, where public education was once treated as a public good. During the 1960s, government funding for these public institutions began to fall precipitously, resulting in the austerity regime we are witnessing today. The reason? Conservatives waged an ideological war against publicly funded colleges and universities that had become a place for social justice activism. Free and low-cost college became the norm when President Abraham Lincoln signed the Morrill Act of 1862, which provided land grants for states to establish public colleges and universities. In the 20th century, the federal government displayed its commitment to expanding educational opportunity with the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, also known as the GI Bill, which covered tuition and expenses for veterans attending college or trade school. In the postwar era, college enrollment soared thanks to the advent of federal student grants and loans through the 1958 National Defense Education Act, and the expansion of federal financial aid and work-study programs for low-income students with the 1965 Higher Education Act. Political support for such policies began to change during the 1960s as the civil rights movement expanded to college campuses. Student activists demanded more equitable campus environments and increased admissions for students of color. Universities developed affirmative action policies to diversify and transform their overwhelmingly White student bodies. Conservatives responded by cutting funds for public education and advancing the idea that not everyone — particularly working-class and low-income people — should have access to college. California Gov. Ronald Reagan fired the first shot by cutting funding to the University of California system and then for the first time making in-state students pay tuition as well as fees, as part of an effort to politicize education and make it a wedge issue. At the time, California public colleges and universities had become centers of student antiwar and civil rights activism. The Free Speech Movement formed at the University of California at Berkeley when students challenged campus policies against political protest and free speech. That student movement was later motivated by opposition to the Vietnam War. In the year following the assassination of Malcolm X, Merritt Junior College students Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale founded the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense in 1966 in Oakland, Calif. And students of color at San Francisco State University staged the longest student strike starting in 1968, leading to the birth of the ethnic studies movement across the country. And so, at a time when higher education had begun to diversify its student body and expand opportunity for marginalized communities, conservatives made the case for college education as a private endeavor for the individual rather than a public good that benefits society. Reagan’s education adviser, Roger Freeman, warned, “We are in danger of producing an educated proletariat. … That’s dynamite! We have to be selective on who we allow [to go to college]. If not, we will have a large number of highly trained and unemployed people,” he added, claiming such conditions had created fascism in Germany. Reagan — who according to an FBI memo was “dedicated to the destruction of disruptive elements on California college campuses” — cut funding to the UC system as a means to engage in austerity politics and please the conservative base. Narrowing the scope of government, Reagan charged tuition to “get rid of undesirables … those who are there to carry signs and not to study might think twice to carry picket signs.” The measure changed public education, and like-minded government officials in other states followed suit. Soon, other public institutions including the University of Florida and the City University of New York would turn their backs on free college. As president, Reagan expanded these efforts, joining forces with congressional Republicans and conservative Democrats to pass cuts to federal student aid. This forced students in need — regarded as “undeserving” like “welfare queens” by Reagan’s Secretary of Education Terrel Bell — to resort to taking out student loans. The Reagan administration justified the cuts as part of “a major philosophical shift” to return “to the traditional emphasis on parent and student responsibility for financing college costs.” Meanwhile, the federal government began to encourage student loans, and schools regarded students as consumers. Critics, including institutions of higher education themselves, viewed the cuts as brutal and predicted admissions from low-income students would drop. Such was the legacy of Reaganomics, of funding tax cuts to the wealthy by slashing social programs. The Republican Party consensus was that students were an economic drain on the country and that taxpayers were not obligated to fund student aid. We are living with the consequences today. While state and federal governments once covered most of the cost of attending public college, today much more of the burden falls on students. In addition, in an effort to climb in the rankings and increase revenue, many public universities have employed the practices of their private counterparts and excluded low-income and working-class students by pursuing wealthier students. Public universities have become less accessible to low-income students and students of color, and the covid pandemic has further exposed the inequities in higher education as fewer needy students are applying to college, in what has been described as an “alarming” nationwide exodus. And in recent weeks the University of California system — where Reagan first waged the culture wars against public investment in higher education — has become ground zero in the labor union struggle on college campuses. In the largest action by academic workers in U.S. history, 48,000 graduate students employed by the University of California system and represented by the United Auto Workers went on strike for nearly six weeks, demanding higher wages and child care. While 12,000 striking postdoctoral employees and academic researchers reached an agreement and returned to work earlier this month, 36,000 workers remained on strike until last week when they voted to ratify new contracts. Faculty are also pushing back. Todd Wolfson, a journalism professor and faculty union vice president at Rutgers University, has pushed to address the crisis in higher education, which was made worse by the pandemic, by rethinking it as a “public socialized good that can reinvigorate our democracy and workers on our campuses must be treated with dignity and respect.” Free or low-cost college used to be the norm, but now, as austerity measures saddle students with debt and create precarious conditions for many academic workers, American politicians create policy that treats higher education as a luxury. And today, college remains a weapon in the culture wars, with attacks on affirmative action, diversity, equity and inclusion, critical race theory and academic freedom. America has the opportunity to return to the days before the Reagan education cuts and restore college as a public good rather than a profit center. Such a measure would benefit society as a whole and combat racial and economic inequality, which is precisely why conservatives oppose these steps in the first place.:20221229
Biden_Defends_Loan_Cancellation:WASHINGTON — The Biden administration asked the Supreme Court on Wednesday to uphold its decision to forgive hundreds of billions of dollars of student loan debt for tens of millions of Americans, arguing that it was acting within its executive authority and did not need new congressional authorization. In a brief filed with the justices, the Justice Department rejected legal challenges mounted by a half-dozen Republican-led states and maintained that the states did not have a basis for contesting the decision in court in the first place. The administration responded to the challenges a month after the court agreed to hear the matter and put the case on an expedited timetable. The justices plan to hear arguments in February and left in place an injunction issued by a lower court blocking the administration from proceeding with the program until the legal questions have been resolved. The program would forgive as much as $20,000 in debt for as many as 40 million borrowers making under $125,000 a year. More than 16 million potential beneficiaries have already been approved for the relief if the court allows the program to proceed, and millions more have applied. The administration said nearly 90 percent of the benefits would go to borrowers who had already finished school and were making less than $75,000 a year. President Biden’s decision to offer the forgiveness represented one of the most sweeping spending decisions ever initiated by a president without a specific congressional vote. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has estimated its cost at $400 billion over 30 years, with the bulk of the effects to the economy over the next decade. The states challenging the decision — Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska and South Carolina — maintain that the administration did not have the power to authorize such an expansive move on its own and argue that it would deprive the states of future tax revenue. “The administration is once again invoking the Covid-19 pandemic to assert power far beyond anything Congress could have conceived,” the states said in a brief filed with the Supreme Court in November, noting that the justices had previously ruled against two other Covid-related measures. Now, they added, “while President Biden publicly declares the pandemic over, the secretary and Department of Education are using Covid-19 to justify the mass debt cancellation.” Most borrowers have already been able to skip student loan payments for nearly three years under a Covid-19 relief measure initiated under President Donald J. Trump in March 2020 and continued under Mr. Biden. Mr. Biden’s administration has extended the suspension of payments until as late as September. The Biden team’s legal brief filed on Wednesday contended that the pandemic also provided the grounds for the debt cancellation program, arguing that the administration had the authority under the Heroes Act of 2003, which allows the secretary of education to grant relief during times of war or national emergency. The secretary’s actions fall comfortably within the plain text of the act, the brief said, referring to Education Secretary Miguel A. Cardona. The brief also challenged the states’ right to sue over the program. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, which imposed the injunction temporarily halting the forgiveness pending legal resolution, focused on the possibility of harm to the Missouri Higher Education Loan Authority, a nonprofit entity that services federal loans. But the administration brief argued that the authority is separate from the State of Missouri and that any harm is highly speculative. The brief also said two borrowers who sued in Texas, reprewith 50 percent supporting it and 47 percent opposing it, according to CNN exit polls, the program had far higher support among younger voters, who broke sented by a special interest group, did not have standing to challenge the program. The student loan plan may have played a role in bolstering Democrats in November’s midterm elections. While voters as a whole split relatively evenly on the matter, decisively for Democrats.:20230104
Feds_Propose_Student_Loan_Safety_Net:Feds propose 'student loan safety net' alongside forgiveness The White House is moving forward with a proposal that would lower student debt payments for millions of Americans now and in the future WASHINGTON -- The White House is moving forward with a proposal that would lower student debt payments for millions of Americans now and in the future, offering a new route to repay federal loans under far more generous terms. President Joe Biden announced the repayment plan in August, but it was overshadowed by his sweeping plan to slash or eliminate student debt for 40 million Americans. Despite the low profile of the payment plan, however, some education experts see it as a more powerful tool to make college affordable, especially for those with lower incomes. Education Department officials on Tuesday called the new plan a “student loan safety net that will prevent borrowers from getting overloaded with debt. “Student debt has become a dream killer,” Education Secretary Miguel Cardona said. “This is a promise to the American people that, at long last, we will fix a broken system and make student loans affordable.” Biden, a Democrat, is moving forward with the repayment plan even as his one-time debt cancellation faces an uncertain fate before the Supreme Court. The White House has asked the court to uphold the plan and reject two legal challenges from conservative opponents. The Biden administration submitted its brief last week, with oral arguments slated for Feb. 28. The Education Department formally proposed the new repayment plan on Tuesday by publishing it in the Federal Register, starting a public comment period that often takes months to navigate. If it's finalized, the proposal would give a major overhaul to income-driven repayment plans — one of several payment options offered by the federal government. The resulting plan would have lower monthly payments, an easier path to forgiveness and a promise that unpaid interest will not be added to a borrower’s loan balance. The federal government now offers four types of income-driven plans, but the proposal would mostly phase out three of them while focusing on one simplified option, scaling back the confusing array of options borrowers now face. Under existing plans, monthly payments are capped at 10% of a borrower’s discretionary income, and those earning less than $20,400 a year aren’t required to make payments. The new proposal would cap payments for undergraduate loans at 5% of borrowers’ discretionary pay, cutting their bills in half, and require payments only for those who earn more than about $30,000 a year. As long as borrowers make their monthly payments, any unpaid interest would not be charged. The change is meant to prevent borrowers from having unpaid interest added to their loan balance, a practice that can cause debt to snowball even as borrowers make payments. Significantly, the proposal would also make it easier to get debt erased after making several years of payments. Existing plans promise to cancel any remaining debt after 20 or 25 years of payments. The new plan would erase all remaining debt after 10 years for those who took out $12,000 or less in loans. For every $1,000 borrowed beyond that, a year would be added. Typical graduates of a four-year university would save about $2,000 a year compared with today’s plans, the Biden administration says, while 85% of community college borrowers would be debt-free within 10 years. Supporters see the proposal as a significant stride toward college affordability. Some say it’s so generous that it approaches free community college — a campaign promise that Biden has pushed but failed to deliver. The Institute for College Access and Success, a nonprofit organization that promotes college affordability, praised the proposal as a significant improvement over existing plans. “The changes proposed today would provide meaningful financial relief to millions of borrowers and help shield students from debt that has not paid off, including those who start college but do not complete a degree,” said Sameer Gadkaree, the group's president. Opponents on the right blast the revamped plan as an unfair handout with a steep price tag. The Biden administration estimates the repayment plan would cost nearly $138 billion over the decade, and some critics have put it closer to $200 billion. Republican Rep. Virginia Foxx, chairwoman of the House Committee on Education and the Workforce, said the proposal turns the federal loan program into an untargeted grant with complete disregard for the taxpayers that fund it.” “Because President Biden couldn’t get his radical free college agenda through Congress, he has resorted to doing it through the backdoor by executive fiat,” Foxx said in a statement. Even some on the left have questioned the prudence of the idea, saying it's so generous that it effectively turns student loans into grants that don’t need to be repaid. That could lead more students to borrow, they warn, and it could spur colleges to raise tuition prices if they know students won’t be on the hook. Still others have urged the administration to abandon income-driven payment plans entirely, calling them a failed policy. Critics cite a federal report from last year finding that sloppy oversight of the program left thousands of borrowers stuck with debt that should have been forgiven. Cardona said his agency is working on other proposals that would hold colleges accountable if their students get overburdened with debt. One idea promoted by Biden is to warn the public about programs that leave graduates saddled with debt. The Education Department on Tuesday began the process to deliver that goal, asking the public about the best way to identify “low-value” programs.:20230110
Sudent_Loan_Plan_Could_Reduce_How_Much_People_Pay:Biden's student loan plan could reduce how much people pay and for how long The policy will have to make it through the regulatory process first. Student loan borrowers could soon pay less money back on their loans and be on the hook for a shorter amount of time, should a new Biden administration rule take effect later this year. The Department of Education on Tuesday began the regulatory process to bring the new loan repayment program into effect -- but the exact timing for when student borrowers could take advantage of the new system wasn’t clear. The process could take any number of months, though it will likely not be finalized before springtime at the earliest, a source familiar with the discussions said. Under the new plan, the lowest-income borrowers would see their payments fall by about $0.83 per each dollar they owe, the Department of Education estimated. The highest-income borrowers would see their payments per dollar fall by about $0.05. It would revise a payment program in which roughly 8 million Americans are enrolled in, known as the income-driven repayment plan. It ties the amount borrowers owe each month to the amount they make in income. “Today, we're making a new promise to today's borrowers and to generations to come, your student loan payments will be affordable. You won't be buried under an avalanche of student interest. And you won't be saddled with a lifetime of debt,” Secretary of Education Miguel Cardona said on a call with reporters. At their core, the revisions to the program are intended to allow Americans to pay back less in loans over time. “It means money in the pockets of hard-working Americans,” Cardona said. It will require smaller minimum payments from borrowers, including $0 in payments from low-income Americans. It will also keep interest accrual more at bay and allow debts to be forgiven sooner -- between 10 and 20 years after they were taken out. Department of Education Undersecretary James Kvaal called it the first “true student loan safety net in this country.” The new plan was first announced alongside President Joe Biden’s student debt relief policy, which has since been bruised by court challenges. Temporarily halted, its fate will be decided by the Supreme Court by the summer. But Cardona on Tuesday called the revisions to the loan repayment program the most influential part of the Biden administration’s plan. Exactly who does this impact, and how? The new plan would prevent single low-income Americans from having to make any monthly payments if they make less than the annual equivalent of $15 an hour, which is around $30,600 a year. For a married couple with two kids, that would rise to $62,400. “Workers getting by on $15 an hour often struggle to pay for their housing, food and other basic needs, let alone student loan payments,” Kvaal said. The new repayment plan would mean they aren’t required to. It would also cut down the amount that borrowers have to make on their monthly payments by half -- from 10% of their discretionary income to 5%, which would protect more of peoples’ incomes from being put toward loan payments. The new plan also prevents interest accrual, one of the largest issues borrowers face, by forgiving unpaid interest so long as borrowers make their monthly payments on the loan itself. “As you make your payments, your balance won't grow. In other words, you won't go deeper into debt because interest is more than you can afford,” Kvaal said. The timeline for some debt forgiveness will also be shortened under the new plan, especially for community college students. After 10 years, the new plan would relieve outstanding debts for people who took out less than $12,000 in loans initially -- commonly students who attend less expensive, shorter programs like community college. The Department of Education estimated that 85% of community college students would be debt-free within 10 years, if they enrolled in the new plan. And, as is already the rule with the income-driven repayment program, all borrowers with outstanding debt after 20 years of payments would have their debt relieved. (For graduate students, the timeline is slightly longer -- 25 years). How much will the program cost? The department estimated that the new plan will cost a net total of $137.9 billion over the next ten years. That cost increase comes after Congress has already decided to keep the budget flat for the Office of Federal Student Aid during the upcoming year -- potentially putting programs on thin ice. Asked if the Department of Education could still afford the reforms to the IDR plan, a senior administration official said they were still working through the “full impact” but that it was their goal. “It's true that we were very disappointed with the level of funding we received from Congress for Federal Student Aid, and that's going to make it a challenge for us to carry out a number of our policy initiatives,” the senior administration official said. “We're currently working through the full impact of the funding level that we received from Congress. And again, our goal is to implement this IDR plan in 2023,” the official said. Critics of the new plan argue that it could cost even more if it incentivizes more people to take out student loans by changing the rules in borrowers’ favor. “The changes mean that most undergraduate borrowers will expect to only repay a fraction of the amount they borrow, turning student loans partially into grants,” Adam Looney, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institute, wrote in September, when the plan was first announced. “It’s a plan to reduce the cost of college, not by reducing tuition paid, but by offering students loans and then allowing them not to pay them back,” he said. But a senior administration official pushed back on that criticism. “Almost every time there is a change in student loans to make the terms more generous for students, people talk about moral hazards and potential abuse of the program and there's just, you know, there's just no evidence that those predictions have ever come to pass,” the official said.The department was attempting to change the repayment system because Americans are taking on higher debts than ever before, the official said. “And the result has been that student debt makes it difficult, even for college graduates, to climb into the middle class, buy a home, start a family, and that many students are left worse off because of their student debt than if they had never gone to college at all,” the official said. “So our goals are to address those challenges, which are very real.”:20230110
